---
layout: pr
title:  Crowdcrafting wins a 2014 Nominet Trust 100 Award
source: PyBossa
source_home: http://pybossa.com/
date:   2014-12-05
link: /press/2014/12/05/award-2014NT100/
screenshot: scientificamerican.png
featured: no
type: press
author: clarilla
photo: /assets/img/2014NT100.png
photo_author: Nominet Trust
intro: "Crowdcrafting recognised as one of the social technology companies of the year"
---
On 4 December, the Nominet Trust recognised Crowdcrafting as one of the most
inspiring hi-tech social innovations of 2014 and "*the world’s most diverse open
source software platform for ‘citizen science’ projects*".

Crowdcrafting is an open source service run by Madrid-based company Scifabric
that allows anyone to set-up up their own online research project. Research
data can be inexpensively crowdsourced to large networks of volunteers who are
asked to complete specific tasks to help analyse it. Such tasks usually can not
be completed by computers. 

Nominet is one the world’s leading internet registry companies and guardians of
the .uk domain space. The Nominet Trust focuses on funding internet based
projects that have a positive impact on the lives of individuals and
communities, especially those most vulnerable or disadvantaged. Each year the
Trust identifies one hundred examples of the world’s most inspiring social
innovations, where digital technologies have been used to to tackle a
significant social change.

The 2014 Nominet Trust 100 was selected by a committee of prominent digital and
social entrepreneurs from around the world, which included Tom Hulme (Google),
Simon Devonshire (Wayra) and Caroline Daniel (Financial Times).

The committee was particularly impressed by projects hosted on Crowdcrafting
such as FrackFinder, whose volunteers took just over a month to classify
thousands of aerial images of Pennsylvania to build an accurate map of fracking
activity in the state, and the Digital Humanitarian Network, that helped to
analyse tweets in the aftermath of Typhoon Pablo (Philippines, 2012) in order
to efficiently bring aid to those worst affected. 


## More information
[http://socialtech.org.uk/nominet-trust-100/](http://socialtech.org.uk/nominet-trust-100/)

[http://crowdcrafting.org](http://crowdcrafting.org/?utm_source=2014NT100&utm_medium=pr&utm_content=webpage&utm_campaign=2014NT100)

## Download Press Release
[English](/assets/downloads/Crowdcrafting-Press-Release-Nominet-Trust-2014-Award.pdf)
[Spanish](/assets/downloads/Crowdcrafting-Nota-Prensa-Ganador-Nominet-Trust-2014.pdf)
